Soft Actor-Critic Algorithms and Applications

Tuomas Haarnoja∗†‡

arXiv:1812.05905v2 [cs.LG] 29 Jan 2019

Sehoon Ha‡

Aurick Zhou∗†

Jie Tan‡

Kristian Hartikainen∗†

Vikash Kumar‡

Pieter Abbeel†

Henry Zhu†

George Tucker‡
Abhishek Gupta†

Sergey Levine†‡

Abstract
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been successfully
applied to a range of challenging sequential decision making and control tasks.
However, these methods typically suffer from two major challenges: high sample
complexity and brittleness to hyperparameters. Both of these challenges limit the
applicability of such methods to real-world domains. In this paper, we describe
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC), our recently introduced off-policy actor-critic algorithm
based on the maximum entropy RL framework. In this framework, the actor aims
to simultaneously maximize expected return and entropy; that is, to succeed at
the task while acting as randomly as possible. We extend SAC to incorporate a
number of modifications that accelerate training and improve stability with respect
to the hyperparameters, including a constrained formulation that automatically
tunes the temperature hyperparameter. We systematically evaluate SAC on a range
of benchmark tasks, as well as challenging real-world tasks such as locomotion for
a quadrupedal robot and robotic manipulation with a dexterous hand. With these
improvements, SAC achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming prior
on-policy and off-policy methods in sample-efficiency and asymptotic performance.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that, in contrast to other off-policy algorithms, our
approach is very stable, achieving similar performance across different random
seeds. These results suggest that SAC is a promising candidate for learning in
real-world robotics tasks.

1

Introduction

Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been applied in a range of challenging
domains, from games (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016) to robotic control (Gu et al., 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2018b). The combination of RL and high-capacity function approximators such as
neural networks holds the promise of automating a wide range of decision making and control tasks,
but widespread adoption of these methods in real-world domains has been hampered by two major
challenges. First, model-free deep RL methods are notoriously expensive in terms of their sample
complexity. Even relatively simple tasks can require millions of steps of data collection, and complex
behaviors with high-dimensional observations might need substantially more. Second, these methods
are often brittle with respect to their hyperparameters: learning rates, exploration constants, and other
settings must be set carefully for different problem settings to achieve good results. Both of these
challenges severely limit the applicability of model-free deep RL to real-world tasks.
One cause for the poor sample efficiency of deep RL methods is on-policy learning: some of the most
commonly used deep RL algorithms, such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), PPO (Schulman et al.,
†

UC Berkeley, ‡ Google Brain, ∗ Contributed equally

2017b) or A3C (Mnih et al., 2016), require new samples to be collected for (nearly) every update to the
policy. This quickly becomes extravagantly expensive, as the number of gradient steps and samples
per step needed to learn an effective policy increases with task complexity. Off-policy algorithms aim
to reuse past experience. This is not directly feasible with conventional policy gradient formulations,
but is relatively straightforward for Q-learning based methods (Mnih et al., 2015). Unfortunately,
the combination of off-policy learning and high-dimensional, nonlinear function approximation with
neural networks presents a major challenge for stability and convergence (Bhatnagar et al., 2009).
This challenge is further exacerbated in continuous state and action spaces, where a separate actor
network is often used to perform the maximization in Q-learning.
In (Haarnoja et al., 2018c), we introduced the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm based on the
maximum entropy framework (Ziebart et al., 2008; Toussaint, 2009; Rawlik et al., 2012; Fox et al.,
2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017). In the first sections of this paper, we summarize the SAC algorithm,
describe the reasoning behind the design choices, and present key theoretical results from (Haarnoja
et al., 2018c). Unfortunately, SAC as presented in (Haarnoja et al., 2018c) can suffer from brittleness
to the temperature hyperparameter. Unlike in conventional reinforcement learning, where the optimal
policy is independent of scaling of the reward function, in maximum entropy reinforcement learning
the scaling factor has to be compensated by the choice a of suitable temperature, and a sub-optimal
temperature can drastically degrade performance (Haarnoja et al., 2018c). To resolve this issue, we
devise an automatic gradient-based temperature tuning method that adjusts the expected entropy
over the visited states to match a target value. Although this modification is technically simple, we
find that in practice it largely eliminates the need for per-task hyperparameter tuning. Finally, we
present empirical results that show that Soft Actor-Critic attains a substantial improvement in both
performance and sample efficiency over prior off-policy and on-policy methods including the recently
introduced twin delayed deep deterministic (TD3) policy gradient algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018).
We also evaluate our method on real-world challenging tasks such as locomotion for a quadrupedal
robot and robotic manipulation with a dexterous hand from image observations.

2

Related Work

Maximum entropy reinforcement learning generalizes the expected return RL objective, although
the original objective can be recovered in the zero temperature limit (Haarnoja et al., 2017). More
importantly, the maximum entropy formulation provides a substantial improvement in exploration
and robustness: as discussed by Ziebart (2010), maximum entropy policies are robust in the face of
model and estimation errors, and as demonstrated by (Haarnoja et al., 2017), they improve exploration
by acquiring diverse behaviors. Prior work has proposed model-free deep RL algorithms that perform
on-policy learning with entropy maximization (O’Donoghue et al., 2016), as well as off-policy
methods based on soft Q-learning and its variants (Schulman et al., 2017a; Nachum et al., 2017a;
Haarnoja et al., 2017). However, the on-policy variants suffer from poor sample complexity for
the reasons discussed above, while the off-policy variants require complex approximate inference
procedures in continuous action spaces.
Our soft actor-critic algorithm incorporates three key ingredients: an actor-critic architecture with
separate policy and value function networks, an off-policy formulation that enables reuse of previously
collected data for efficiency, and entropy maximization to encourage stability and exploration. We
review prior work that draw on some of these ideas in this section. Actor-critic algorithms are typically
derived starting from policy iteration, which alternates between policy evaluation—computing the
value function for a policy—and policy improvement—using the value function to obtain a better
policy (Barto et al., 1983; Sutton & Barto, 1998). In large-scale reinforcement learning problems, it
is typically impractical to run either of these steps to convergence, and instead the value function
and policy are optimized jointly. In this case, the policy is referred to as the actor, and the value
function as the critic. Many actor-critic algorithms build on the standard, on-policy policy gradient
formulation to update the actor (Peters & Schaal, 2008), and many of them also consider the entropy
of the policy, but instead of maximizing the entropy, they use it as an regularizer (Schulman et al.,
2017b, 2015; Mnih et al., 2016; Gruslys et al., 2017). On-policy training tends to improve stability
but results in poor sample complexity.
There have been efforts to increase the sample efficiency while retaining robustness by incorporating
off-policy samples and by using higher order variance reduction techniques (O’Donoghue et al., 2016;
Gu et al., 2016). However, fully off-policy algorithms still attain better efficiency. A particularly
2

popular off-policy actor-critic method, DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), which is a deep variant of
the deterministic policy gradient (Silver et al., 2014) algorithm, uses a Q-function estimator to
enable off-policy learning, and a deterministic actor that maximizes this Q-function. As such, this
method can be viewed both as a deterministic actor-critic algorithm and an approximate Q-learning
algorithm. Unfortunately, the interplay between the deterministic actor network and the Q-function
typically makes DDPG extremely difficult to stabilize and brittle to hyperparameter settings (Duan
et al., 2016; Henderson et al., 2017). As a consequence, it is difficult to extend DDPG to complex,
high-dimensional tasks, and on-policy policy gradient methods still tend to produce the best results in
such settings (Gu et al., 2016). Our method instead combines off-policy actor-critic training with a
stochastic actor, and further aims to maximize the entropy of this actor with an entropy maximization
objective. We find that this actually results in a considerably more stable and scalable algorithm
that, in practice, exceeds both the efficiency and final performance of DDPG. A similar method can
be derived as a zero-step special case of stochastic value gradients (SVG(0)) (Heess et al., 2015).
However, SVG(0) differs from our method in that it optimizes the standard maximum expected return
objective.
Maximum entropy reinforcement learning optimizes policies to maximize both the expected return
and the expected entropy of the policy. This framework has been used in many contexts, from inverse
reinforcement learning (Ziebart et al., 2008) to optimal control (Todorov, 2008; Toussaint, 2009;
Rawlik et al., 2012). Maximum a posteriori policy optimization (MPO) makes use of the probablistic
view and optimizes the standard RL objective via expectation maximization (Abdolmaleki et al.,
2018). In guided policy search (Levine & Koltun, 2013; Levine et al., 2016), the maximum entropy
distribution is used to guide policy learning towards high-reward regions. More recently, several
papers have noted the connection between Q-learning and policy gradient methods in the framework
of maximum entropy learning (O’Donoghue et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2017a;
Schulman et al., 2017a). While most of the prior model-free works assume a discrete action space,
Nachum et al. (2017b) approximate the maximum entropy distribution with a Gaussian, and Haarnoja
et al. (2017) with a sampling network trained to draw samples from the optimal policy. Although
the soft Q-learning algorithm proposed by Haarnoja et al. (2017) has a value function and actor
network, it is not a true actor-critic algorithm: the Q-function is estimating the optimal Q-function,
and the actor does not directly affect the Q-function except through the data distribution. Hence,
Haarnoja et al. (2017) motivates the actor network as an approximate sampler, rather than the actor
in an actor-critic algorithm. Crucially, the convergence of this method hinges on how well this
sampler approximates the true posterior. In contrast, we prove that our method converges to the
optimal policy from a given policy class, regardless of the policy parameterization. Furthermore,
these prior maximum entropy methods generally do not exceed the performance of state-of-the-art
off-policy algorithms, such as TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) or MPO (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018), when
learning from scratch, though they may have other benefits, such as improved exploration and ease of
fine-tuning.

3

Preliminaries

We first introduce notation and summarize the standard and maximum entropy reinforcement learning
frameworks.
3.1

Notation

We will address learning of maximum entropy policies in continuous action spaces. Our reinforcement
learning problem can be defined as policy search in an a Markov decision process (MDP), defined
by a tuple (S, A, p, r). The state space S and action space A are assumed to be continuous, and the
state transition probability p : S × S × A → [0, ∞) represents the probability density of the next
state st+1 ∈ S given the current state st ∈ S and action at ∈ A. The environment emits a reward
r : S × A → [rmin , rmax ] on each transition. We will also use ρπ (st ) and ρπ (st , at ) to denote the
state and state-action marginals of the trajectory distribution induced by a policy π(at |st ).
3.2

Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning

The
P

standard

reinforcement

learning

objective

is

the

expected

sum

of

rewards

t E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r(st , at )] and our goal is to learn a policy π(at |st ) that maximizes that ob-

3

jective. The maximum entropy objective (see e.g. (Ziebart, 2010) generalizes the standard objective
by augmenting it with an entropy term, such that the optimal policy additionally aims to maximize its
entropy at each visited state:
X
π ∗ = arg max
E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r(st , at ) + αH(π( · |st ))] ,
(1)
π

t

where α is the temperature parameter that determines the relative importance of the entropy term
versus the reward, and thus controls the stochasticity of the optimal policy. Although the maximum
entropy objective differs from the standard maximum expected return objective used in conventional
reinforcement learning, the conventional objective can be recovered in the limit as α → 0. If we wish
to extend either the conventional or the maximum entropy RL objective to infinite horizon problems,
it is convenient to also introduce a discount factor γ to ensure that the sum of expected rewards (and
entropies) is finite. In the context of policy search algorithms, the use of a discount factor is actually
a somewhat nuanced choice, and writing down the precise objective that is optimized when using the
discount factor is non-trivial (Thomas, 2014). We include the discounted, infinite-horizon objective
in Appendix A, but we will use the discount γ in the following derivations and in our final algorithm.
The maximum entropy objective has a number of conceptual and practical advantages. First, the
policy is incentivized to explore more widely, while giving up on clearly unpromising avenues.
Second, the policy can capture multiple modes of near-optimal behavior. In problem settings where
multiple actions seem equally attractive, the policy will commit equal probability mass to those
actions. In practice, we observe improved exploration with this objective, as also has been reported in
the prior work (Schulman et al., 2017a), and we observe that it considerably improves learning speed
over state-of-art methods that optimize the conventional RL objective function.
Optimization problems of this type have been explored in a number of prior works (Kappen, 2005;
Todorov, 2007; Ziebart et al., 2008). These prior methods have proposed directly solving for the
optimal Q-function, from which the optimal policy can be recovered (Ziebart et al., 2008; Fox et al.,
2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017). In the following section, we discuss how we can devise a soft actorcritic algorithm through a policy iteration formulation, where we instead evaluate the Q-function
of the current policy and update the policy through an off-policy gradient update. Though such
algorithms have previously been proposed for conventional reinforcement learning, our method is,
to our knowledge, the first off-policy actor-critic method in the maximum entropy reinforcement
learning framework.

4

From Soft Policy Iteration to Soft Actor-Critic

Our off-policy soft actor-critic algorithm can be derived starting from a maximum entropy variant
of the policy iteration method. We will first present this derivation, verify that the corresponding
algorithm converges to the optimal policy from its density class, and then present a practical deep
reinforcement learning algorithm based on this theory. In this section, we treat the temperature as a
constant, and later in Section 5 propose an extension to SAC that adjusts the temperature automatically
to match an entropy target in expectation.
4.1

Soft Policy Iteration

We will begin by deriving soft policy iteration, a general algorithm for learning optimal maximum
entropy policies that alternates between policy evaluation and policy improvement in the maximum
entropy framework. Our derivation is based on a tabular setting, to enable theoretical analysis and
convergence guarantees, and we extend this method into the general continuous setting in the next
section. We will show that soft policy iteration converges to the optimal policy within a set of policies
which might correspond, for instance, to a set of parameterized densities.
In the policy evaluation step of soft policy iteration, we wish to compute the value of a policy π
according to the maximum entropy objective. For a fixed policy, the soft Q-value can be computed
iteratively, starting from any function Q : S × A → R and repeatedly applying a modified Bellman
backup operator T π given by
T π Q(st , at ) , r(st , at ) + γ Est+1 ∼p [V (st+1 )] ,
4

(2)

where
V (st ) = Eat ∼π [Q(st , at ) − α log π(at |st )]

(3)

is the soft state value function. We can obtain the soft Q-function for any policy π by repeatedly
applying T π as formalized below.
Lemma 1 (Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator T π in Equation 2
and a mapping Q0 : S × A → R with |A| < ∞, and define Qk+1 = T π Qk . Then the sequence Qk
will converge to the soft Q-function of π as k → ∞.
Proof. See Appendix B.1.
In the policy improvement step, we update the policy towards the exponential of the new soft Qfunction. This particular choice of update can be guaranteed to result in an improved policy in terms
of its soft value. Since in practice we prefer policies that are tractable, we will additionally restrict
the policy to some set of policies Π, which can correspond, for example, to a parameterized family of
distributions such as Gaussians. To account for the constraint that π ∈ Π, we project the improved
policy into the desired set of policies. While in principle we could choose any projection, it will
turn out to be convenient to use the information projection defined in terms of the Kullback-Leibler
divergence. In the other words, in the policy improvement step, for each state, we update the policy
according to
!
exp α1 Qπold (st , · )
0
πnew = arg min
DKL π ( · |st )
.
(4)
π 0 ∈Π
Z πold (st )
The partition function Z πold (st ) normalizes the distribution, and while it is intractable in general, it
does not contribute to the gradient with respect to the new policy and can thus be ignored. For this
projection, we can show that the new, projected policy has a higher value than the old policy with
respect to the maximum entropy objective. We formalize this result in Lemma 2.
Lemma 2 (Soft Policy Improvement). Let πold ∈ Π and let πnew be the optimizer of the minimization
problem defined in Equation 4. Then Qπnew (st , at ) ≥ Qπold (st , at ) for all (st , at ) ∈ S × A with
|A| < ∞.
Proof. See Appendix B.2.
The full soft policy iteration algorithm alternates between the soft policy evaluation and the soft
policy improvement steps, and it will provably converge to the optimal maximum entropy policy
among the policies in Π (Theorem 1). Although this algorithm will provably find the optimal solution,
we can perform it in its exact form only in the tabular case. Therefore, we will next approximate the
algorithm for continuous domains, where we need to rely on a function approximator to represent the
Q-values, and running the two steps until convergence would be computationally too expensive. The
approximation gives rise to a new practical algorithm, called soft actor-critic.
Theorem 1 (Soft Policy Iteration). Repeated application of soft policy evaluation and soft policy
∗
improvement from any π ∈ Π converges to a policy π ∗ such that Qπ (st , at ) ≥ Qπ (st , at ) for all
π ∈ Π and (st , at ) ∈ S × A, assuming |A| < ∞.
Proof. See Appendix B.3.
4.2

Soft Actor-Critic

As discussed above, large continuous domains require us to derive a practical approximation to soft
policy iteration. To that end, we will use function approximators for both the soft Q-function and
the policy, and instead of running evaluation and improvement to convergence, alternate between
optimizing both networks with stochastic gradient descent. We will consider a parameterized soft
Q-function Qθ (st , at ) and a tractable policy πφ (at |st ). The parameters of these networks are θ and
φ. For example, the soft Q-function can be modeled as expressive neural networks, and the policy as
a Gaussian with mean and covariance given by neural networks. We will next derive update rules for
these parameter vectors.
5

The soft Q-function parameters can be trained to minimize the soft Bellman residual


2
1
JQ (θ) = E(st ,at )∼D
Qθ (st , at ) − r(st , at ) + γ Est+1 ∼p [Vθ̄ (st+1 )]
,
2

(5)

where the value function is implicitly parameterized through the soft Q-function parameters via
Equation 3, and it can be optimized with stochastic gradients1
ˆ θ JQ (θ) = ∇θ Qθ (at , st ) (Qθ (st , at ) − (r(st , at ) + γ (Qθ̄ (st+1 , at+1 ) − α log (πφ (at+1 |st+1 )))) .
∇
(6)
The update makes use of a target soft Q-function with parameters θ̄ that are obtained as an exponentially moving average of the soft Q-function weights, which has been shown to stabilize training (Mnih
et al., 2015). Finally, the policy parameters can be learned by directly minimizing the expected
KL-divergence in Equation 4 (multiplied by α and ignoring the constant log-partition function and by
α):


Jπ (φ) = Est ∼D Eat ∼πφ [α log (πφ (at |st )) − Qθ (st , st )]
(7)
There are several options for minimizing Jπ . A typical solution for policy gradient methods is to use
the likelihood ratio gradient estimator (Williams, 1992), which does not require backpropagating the
gradient through the policy and the target density networks. However, in our case, the target density
is the Q-function, which is represented by a neural network an can be differentiated, and it is thus
convenient to apply the reparameterization trick instead, resulting in a lower variance estimator. To
that end, we reparameterize the policy using a neural network transformation
at = fφ (t ; st ),

(8)

where t is an input noise vector, sampled from some fixed distribution, such as a spherical Gaussian.
We can now rewrite the objective in Equation 7 as
Jπ (φ) = Est ∼D,t ∼N [α log πφ (fφ (t ; st )|st ) − Qθ (st , fφ (t ; st ))] ,

(9)

where πφ is defined implicitly in terms of fφ . We can approximate the gradient of Equation 9 with
ˆ φ Jπ (φ) = ∇φ α log (πφ (at |st )) + (∇a α log (πφ (at |st )) − ∇a Q(st , at ))∇φ fφ (t ; st ), (10)
∇
t
t
where at is evaluated at fφ (t ; st ). This unbiased gradient estimator extends the DDPG style policy
gradients (Lillicrap et al., 2015) to any tractable stochastic policy.

5

Automating Entropy Adjustment for Maximum Entropy RL

In the previous section, we derived a practical off-policy algorithm for learning maximum entropy
policies of a given temperature. Unfortunately, choosing the optimal temperature is non-trivial, and
the temperature needs to be tuned for each task. Instead of requiring the user to set the temperature
manually, we can automate this process by formulating a different maximum entropy reinforcement
learning objective, where the entropy is treated as a constraint. The magnitude of the reward differs not
only across tasks, but it also depends on the policy, which improves over time during training. Since
the optimal entropy depends on this magnitude, this makes the temperature adjustment particularly
difficult: the entropy can vary unpredictably both across tasks and during training as the policy
becomes better. Simply forcing the entropy to a fixed value is a poor solution, since the policy
should be free to explore more in regions where the optimal action is uncertain, but remain more
deterministic in states with a clear distinction between good and bad actions. Instead, we formulate
a constrained optimization problem where the average entropy of the policy is constrained, while
the entropy at different states can vary. Similar approach was taken in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018),
where the policy was constrained to remain close to the previous policy. We show that the dual to this
constrained optimization leads to the soft actor-critic updates, along with an additional update for
the dual variable, which plays the role of the temperature. Our formulation also makes it possible to
learn the entropy with more expressive policies that can model multi-modal distributions, such as
policies based on normalizing flows (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) for which no closed form expression for
1

In (Haarnoja et al., 2018c) we introduced an additional function approximator for the value function, but
later found it to be unnecessary.

6

the entropy exists. We will derive the update for finite horizon case, and then derive an approximation
for stationary policies by dropping the time dependencies from the policy, soft Q-function, and the
temperature.
Our aim is to find a stochastic policy with maximal expected return that satisfies a minimum expected
entropy constraint. Formally, we want to solve the constrained optimization problem
#
" T
X
max Eρπ
r(st , at ) s.t. E(st ,at )∼ρπ [− log(πt (at |st ))] ≥ H ∀t
(11)
π0:T

t=0

where H is a desired minimum expected entropy. Note that, for fully observed MDPs, the policy that
optimizes the expected return is deterministic, so we expect this constraint to usually be tight and do
not need to impose an upper bound on the entropy.
Since the policy at time t can only affect the future objective value, we can employ an (approximate)
dynamic programming approach, solving for the policy backward through time. We rewrite the
objective as an iterated maximization



max E [r(s0 , a0 )] + max E [. . .] + max E [r(sT , aT )]
,
(12)
π0

π1

πT

subject to the constraint on entropy. Starting from the last time step, we change the constrained
maximization to the dual problem. Subject to E(sT ,aT )∼ρπ [− log(πT (sT |sT ))] ≥ H,
max E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r(sT , aT )] = min max E [r(sT , aT ) − αT log π(aT |sT )] − αT H,
πT

αT ≥0 πT

(13)

where αT is the dual variable. We have also used strong duality, which holds since the objective is
linear and the constraint (entropy) is convex function in πT . This dual objective is closely related to
the maximum entropy objective with respect to the policy, and the optimal policy is the maximum
entropy policy corresponding to temperature αT : πT∗ (aT |sT ; αT ). We can solve for the optimal dual
variable αT∗ as
arg min Est ,at ∼πt∗ [−αT log πT∗ (aT |sT ; αT ) − αT H] .
αT

(14)

To simplify notation, we make use of the recursive definition of the soft Q-function


∗
∗
∗
∗
Q∗t (st , at ; πt+1:T
, αt+1:T
) = E [r(st , at )] + Eρπ Q∗t+1 (st+1 , at+1 ) − αt+1
log πt+1
(at+1 |st+1 ) ,
(15)
with Q∗T (sT , aT ) = E [r(sT , aT )]. Now, subject to the entropy constraints and again using the dual
problem, we have


max E [r(sT −1 , aT −1 )] + max E [r(sT , aT )]
(16)
πT −1
πT

= max Q∗T −1 (sT −1 , aT −1 ) − αT H
πT −1


 ∗

= min max E QT −1 (sT −1 , aT −1 ) − E [αT −1 log π(aT −1 |sT −1 )] − αT −1 H + αT∗ H.
αT −1 ≥0 πT −1

In this way, we can proceed backwards in time and recursively optimize Equation 11. Note that the
optimal policy at time t is a function of the dual variable αt . Similarly, we can solve the optimal dual
variable αt∗ after solving for Q∗t and πt∗ :


αt∗ = arg min Eat ∼πt∗ −αt log πt∗ (at |st ; αt ) − αt H̄ .
(17)
αt

The solution in Equation 17 along with the policy and soft Q-function updates described in Section 4
constitute the core of our algorithm, and in theory, exactly solving them recursively optimize the
optimal entropy-constrained maximum expected return objective in Equation 11, but in practice, we
will need to resort to function approximators and stochastic gradient descent.
7

Algorithm 1 Soft Actor-Critic
Input: θ1 , θ2 , φ
θ̄1 ← θ1 , θ̄2 ← θ2
D←∅
for each iteration do
for each environment step do
at ∼ πφ (at |st )
st+1 ∼ p(st+1 |st , at )
D ← D ∪ {(st , at , r(st , at ), st+1 )}
end for
for each gradient step do
ˆ θ JQ (θi ) for i ∈ {1, 2}
θi ← θi − λ Q ∇
i
ˆ
φ ← φ − λπ ∇φ Jπ (φ)
ˆ α J(α)
α ← α − λ∇
θ̄i ← τ θi + (1 − τ )θ̄i for i ∈ {1, 2}
end for
end for
Output: θ1 , θ2 , φ

6

. Initial parameters
. Initialize target network weights
. Initialize an empty replay pool
. Sample action from the policy
. Sample transition from the environment
. Store the transition in the replay pool

. Update the Q-function parameters
. Update policy weights
. Adjust temperature
. Update target network weights
. Optimized parameters

Practical Algorithm

Our algorithm makes use of two soft Q-functions to mitigate positive bias in the policy improvement
step that is known to degrade performance of value based methods (Hasselt, 2010; Fujimoto et al.,
2018). In particular, we parameterize two soft Q-functions, with parameters θi , and train them
independently to optimize JQ (θi ). We then use the minimum of the the soft Q-functions for the
stochastic gradient in Equation 6 and policy gradient in Equation 10, as proposed by Fujimoto
et al. (2018). Although our algorithm can learn challenging tasks, including a 21-dimensional
Humanoid, using just a single Q-function, we found two soft Q-functions significantly speed up
training, especially on harder tasks.
In addition to the soft Q-function and the policy, we also learn α by minimizing the dual objective
in Equation 17. This can be done by approximating dual gradient descent (Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004). Dual gradient descent alternates between optimizing the Lagrangian with respect to the
primal variables to convergence, and then taking a gradient step on the dual variables. While
optimizing with respect to the primal variables fully is impractical, a truncated version that performs
incomplete optimization (even for a single gradient step) can be shown to converge under convexity
assumptions (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). While such assumptions do not apply to the case of
nonlinear function approximators such as neural networks, we found this approach to still work in
practice. Thus, we compute gradients for α with the following objective:


J(α) = Eat ∼πt −α log πt (at |st ) − αH̄ .
(18)
The final algorithm is listed in Algorithm 1. The method alternates between collecting experience
from the environment with the current policy and updating the function approximators using the
stochastic gradients from batches sampled from a replay pool. Using off-policy data from a replay
pool is feasible because both value estimators and the policy can be trained entirely on off-policy
data. The algorithm is agnostic to the parameterization of the policy, as long as it can be evaluated for
any arbitrary state-action tuple.

7

Experiments

The goal of our experimental evaluation is to understand how the sample complexity and stability of
our method compares with prior off-policy and on-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithms.
We compare our method to prior techniques on a range of challenging continuous control tasks from
the OpenAI gym benchmark suite (Brockman et al., 2016) and also on the rllab implementation of
the Humanoid task (Duan et al., 2016). Although the easier tasks can be solved by a wide range of
different algorithms, the more complex benchmarks, such as the 21-dimensional Humanoid (rllab),
8

Hopper-v2

4000

Walker2d-v2

7000

HalfCheetah-v2
15000

2000

1000

12500

5000

average return

3000

average return

average return

6000

10000

4000
3000
2000

0.2

0.4

0.6

million steps

0.8

0
0.0

1.0

Ant-v2

7000

1.0

1.5

2.0

million steps

2.5

3.0

Humanoid-v2

average return

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

0.5

4000

2000

1.5

2.0

million steps

2.5

3.0

8

10

SAC (learned temperature)
SAC (fixed temperature)
DDPG
TD3
PPO

6000

6000

1.0

Humanoid (rllab)

7000

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

0
−1000
0.0

0.0

8000

6000

average return

0
0.5

average return

0.0

5000
2500

1000
0

7500

0

0
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

million steps

2.5

3.0

0

2

4

6

million steps

8

10

0

2

4

6

million steps

Figure 1: Training curves on continuous control benchmarks. Soft actor-critic (blue and yellow) performs
consistently across all tasks and outperforming both on-policy and off-policy methods in the most challenging
tasks.

are exceptionally difficult to solve with off-policy algorithms (Duan et al., 2016). The stability of
the algorithm also plays a large role in performance: easier tasks make it more practical to tune
hyperparameters to achieve good results, while the already narrow basins of effective hyperparameters
become prohibitively small for the more sensitive algorithms on the hardest benchmarks, leading to
poor performance (Gu et al., 2016).
7.1

Simulated Benchmarks

We compare our method to deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015), an
algorithm that is regarded as one of the more efficient off-policy deep RL methods (Duan et al.,
2016); proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017b), a stable and effective on-policy
policy gradient algorithm; and soft Q-learning (SQL) (Haarnoja et al., 2017), a recent off-policy
algorithm for learning maximum entropy policies. Our SQL implementation also includes two
Q-functions, which we found to improve its performance in most environments. We additionally
compare to twin delayed deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3) (Fujimoto et al., 2018),
using the author-provided implementation. This is an extension to DDPG, proposed concurrently
to our method, that first applied the double Q-learning trick to continuous control along with other
improvements. We turned off the exploration noise for evaluation for DDPG and PPO. For maximum
entropy algorithms, which do not explicitly inject exploration noise, we either evaluated with the
exploration noise (SQL) or use the mean action (SAC). The source code of our SAC implementation2
is available online.
Figure 1 shows the total average return of evaluation rollouts during training for DDPG, PPO, and
TD3. We train five different instances of each algorithm with different random seeds, with each
performing one evaluation rollout every 1000 environment steps. The solid curves corresponds to
the mean and the shaded region to the minimum and maximum returns over the five trials. For SAC,
we include both a version, where the temperature parameter is fixed and treated as a hyperparameter
and tuned for each environment separately (orange), and a version where the temperature is adjusted
automatically (blue). The results show that, overall, SAC performs comparably to the baseline
methods on the easier tasks and outperforms them on the harder tasks with a large margin, both in
terms of learning speed and the final performance. For example, DDPG fails to make any progress on
Ant-v1, Humanoid-v1, and Humanoid (rllab), a result that is corroborated by prior work (Gu et al.,
2016; Duan et al., 2016). SAC also learns considerably faster than PPO as a consequence of the
large batch sizes PPO needs to learn stably on more high-dimensional and complex tasks. Another
2

http://github.com/rail-berkeley/softlearning/

9

maximum entropy RL algorithm, SQL, can also learn all tasks, but it is slower than SAC and has
worse asymptotic performance. The quantitative results attained by SAC in our experiments also
compare very favorably to results reported by other methods in prior work (Duan et al., 2016; Gu
et al., 2016; Henderson et al., 2017), indicating that both the sample efficiency and final performance
of SAC on these benchmark tasks exceeds the state of the art. The results also indicate that the
automatic temperature tuning scheme works well across all the environments, and thus effectively
eliminates the need for tuning the temperature. All hyperparameters used in this experiment for SAC
are listed in Appendix D.

7.2

Quadrupedal Locomotion in the Real World

In this section, we describe an application of our method to learn walking gaits directly in the
real world. We use the Minitaur robot, a small-scale quadruped with eight direct-drive actuators
(Kenneally et al., 2016). Each leg is controlled by two actuators that allow it to move in the sagittal
plane. The Minitaur is equipped with motor encoders that measure the motor angles and an IMU
that measures orientation and angular velocity of Minitaur’s base. The action space are the swing
angle and the extension of each leg, which are then mapped to desired motor positions and tracked
with a PD controller (Tan et al., 2018). The observations include the motor angles as well as roll
and pitch angles and angular velocities of the base. We exclude yaw since it is unreliable due to
drift and irrelevant for the walking task. Note that latencies and contacts in the system make the
dynamics non-Markovian, which can significantly degrade learning performance. We therefore
construct the state out of the current and past five observations and actions. The reward function
rewards large forward velocity, which is estimated using a motion capture system, and penalizes large
angular accelerations, computed via finite differentiation from the last three actions. We also found it
necessary to penalize for large pitch angles and for extending the front legs under the robot, which
we found to be the most common failure cases that would require manual reset. We parameterize the
policy and the value functions with feed-forward neural networks with two hidden-layers and 256
neurons per layer.
We have developed a semi-automatic robot training pipeline that consists of two components parallel
jobs: training and data collection. These jobs run asynchronously on two different computers. The
training process runs on a workstation, which updates the neural networks and periodically downloads
the latest data from the robot and uploads the latest policy to the robot. On the robot, the on-board
Nvidia Jetson TX2 runs the data collection job, which executes the policy, collects the trajectory and
uploads these data to the workstation through Ethernet. Once the training is started, minimal human
intervention is needed, except for the need to reset the robot state if it falls or drifts far from the initial
state.
This learning task presents substantially challenges for real-world reinforcement learning. The robot
is underactuated, and must therefore delicately balance contact forces on the legs to make forward
progress. An untrained policy can lose balance and fall, and too many falls will eventually damage
the robot, making sample-efficient learning essentially. Our method successfully learns to walk from
160k environment steps, or approximately 400 episodes with maximum length of 500 steps, which
amount to approximately 2 hours of real-world training time.
However, in the real world, the utility of a locomotion policy hinges critically on its ability to
generalize to different terrains and obstacles. Although we trained our policy only on flat terrain,
as illustrated in Figure 2 (first row), we then tested it on varied terrains and obstacles (other rows).
Because soft actor-critic learns robust policies, due to entropy maximization at training time, the
policy can readily generalize to these perturbations without any additional learning. The robot is able
to walk up and down a slope (first row), ram through an obstacle made of wooden blocks (second
row), and step down stairs (third row) without difficulty, despite not being trained in these settings.
To our knowledge, this experiment is the first example of a deep reinforcement learning algorithm
learning underactuated quadrupedal locomotion directly in the real world without any simulation
or pretraining. We have included videos of the the training process and evaluation on our project
website3.
10

Figure 2: We trained the Minitaur robot to walk on flat terrain (first row) and tested how the learned gait
generalizes to unseen situations (other rows)

7.3

Dexterous Hand Manipulation

Our second real-world robotic task involves training a 3-finger dexterous robotic hand to manipulate
an object. The hand is based on the “dclaw” hand, discussed by (Zhu et al., 2018). This hand has 9
DoFs, each controlled by a Dynamixel servo-motor. The policy controls the hand by sending target
joint angle positions for the on-board PID controller. The manipulation task requires the hand to
rotate a “valve”-like object (resembling a sink faucet), as shown in Figure 3. In order to perceive
the valve, the robot must use raw RGB images, which are illustrated in the second row of Figure 3.
The images are processed in a neural network, consisting of two convolutional (four 3x3 filters) and
max pool (3x3) layers, followed by two fully connected layers (256 units). The robot must rotate
the valve into the correct position, with the colored part of the valve facing directly to the right,
from any random starting position. The initial position of the valve is reset uniformly at random for
each episode, forcing the policy to learn to use the raw RGB images to perceive the current valve
orientation. A small motor is attached to the valve to automate resets and to provide the ground truth
position for the determination of the reward function. The position of this motor is not provided to
the policy.
This task is exceptionally challenging due to both the perception challenges and the physical difficulty
of rotating the valve with such a complex robotic hand. As can be seen in the accompanying video
on the project website3, rotating the valve requires a complex finger gait where the robot moves the
fingers over the valve in a coordinated pattern, and stops precisely at the desired position.
Learning this task directly from raw RGB images requires 300k environment interaction steps,
which is the equivalent of 20 hours of training, including all resets and neural network training time
(Figure 4). To our knowledge, this task represents one of the most complex robotic manipulation
tasks learned directly end-to-end from raw images in the real world with deep reinforcement learning,
without any simulation or pretraining. We also learned the same task without images by feeding
the valve position directly to the neural networks. In that case, learning takes 3 hours, which is
substantially faster than what has been reported earlier on the same task using PPO (7.4 hours) (Zhu
et al., 2018).

8

Conclusion

In this article, we presented soft actor-critic (SAC), an off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning algorithm that provides sample-efficient learning while retaining the benefits of entropy
maximization and stability. Our theoretical results derive soft policy iteration, which we show to converge to the optimal policy. From this result, we can formulate a practical soft actor-critic algorithm
3

https://sites.google.com/view/sac-and-applications/

11

Figure 3: Valve rotation task with Dynamixel Claw. Top row shows a high resolution image sequence of a

median distance from target

median distance from target

rollout with the policy. Bottom row shows the 32x32 pixel image observations of the same situations. The policy
is also provided the joint positions and velocities of the fingers, but it has to infer the valve position from the
image.

3
2
1
0
0

20

40

60

thousand steps

80

100

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0

(a) Learning from valve joint angle.

100

200

thousand steps

300

(b) Learning from images.

Figure 4: Learning curves for the valve rotation task. The curves correspond to the median distance (measured
in radians) of the valve from the target angle during a rollout. (a) Learning without images takes about 3 hours.
In this case, the valve is reset to point away from the target initially. (b) Learning from images takes about 20
hours. The initial valve position is sampled uniformly at random.

that can be used to train deep neural network policies, and we empirically show that it matches or
exceeds the performance of state-of-the-art model-free deep RL methods, including the off-policy
TD3 algorithm and the on-policy PPO algorithm without any environment specific hyperparameter
tuning. Our real-world experiments indicate that soft actor-critic is robust and sample efficient enough
for robotic tasks learned directly in the real world, such as locomotion and dexterous manipulation.
To our knowledge, these results represent the first evaluation of deep reinforcement learning for
real-world training of underactuated walking skills with a quadrupedal robot, as well as one of the
most complex dexterous manipulation behaviors learned with deep reinforcement learning end-to-end
from raw image observations.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Vitchyr Pong and Haoran Tang for constructive discussions during the
development of soft actor-critic, Vincent Vanhoucke for his support towards the project at Google,
and Amazon for providing computing support.

References
Abdolmaleki, A., Springenberg, J. T., Tassa, Y., Munos, R., Heess, N., and Riedmiller, M. Maximum
a posteriori policy optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06920, 2018.
Barto, A. G., Sutton, R. S., and Anderson, C. W. Neuronlike adaptive elements that can solve difficult
learning control problems. IEEE transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics, pp. 834–846,
1983.
12

Bhatnagar, S., Precup, D., Silver, D., Sutton, R. S., Maei, H. R., and Szepesvári, C. Convergent
temporal-difference learning with arbitrary smooth function approximation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 1204–1212, 2009.
Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W.
OpenAI gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Duan, Y., Chen, X. Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., and Abbeel, P. Benchmarking deep reinforcement
learning for continuous control. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
Fox, R., Pakman, A., and Tishby, N. Taming the noise in reinforcement learning via soft updates. In
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2016.
Fujimoto, S., van Hoof, H., and Meger, D. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic
methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09477, 2018.
Gruslys, A., Azar, M. G., Bellemare, M. G., and Munos, R. The reactor: A sample-efficient
actor-critic architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04651, 2017.
Gu, S., Lillicrap, T., Ghahramani, Z., Turner, R. E., and Levine, S. Q-prop: Sample-efficient policy
gradient with an off-policy critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02247, 2016.
Gu, S., Holly, E., Lillicrap, T., and Levine, S. Deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation
with asynchronous off-policy updates. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 3389–3396. IEEE, 2017.
Haarnoja, T., Tang, H., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Reinforcement learning with deep energy-based
policies. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1352–1361, 2017.
Haarnoja, T., Hartikainen, K., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Latent space policies for hierarchical
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018a.
Haarnoja, T., Pong, V., Zhou, A., Dalal, M., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Composable deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 2018b.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy
deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2018c.
Hasselt, H. V. Double Q-learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
pp. 2613–2621, 2010.
Heess, N., Wayne, G., Silver, D., Lillicrap, T., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Learning continuous control
policies by stochastic value gradients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 2944–2952, 2015.
Henderson, P., Islam, R., Bachman, P., Pineau, J., Precup, D., and Meger, D. Deep reinforcement
learning that matters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06560, 2017.
Kappen, H. J. Path integrals and symmetry breaking for optimal control theory. Journal of Statistical
Mechanics: Theory And Experiment, 2005(11):P11011, 2005.
Kenneally, G., De, A., and Koditschek, D. E. Design principles for a family of direct-drive legged
robots. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 1(2):900–907, 2016.
Kingma, D. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference for
Learning Presentations (ICLR), 2015.
Levine, S. and Koltun, V. Guided policy search. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 1–9, 2013.
13

Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(39):1–40, 2016.
Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D.
Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M.
Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T. P., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu,
K. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D. Bridging the gap between value and policy
based reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp.
2772–2782, 2017a.
Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D. Trust-PCL: An off-policy trust region method
for continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01891, 2017b.
O’Donoghue, B., Munos, R., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Mnih, V. PGQ: Combining policy gradient and
Q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01626, 2016.
Peters, J. and Schaal, S. Reinforcement learning of motor skills with policy gradients. Neural
networks, 21(4):682–697, 2008.
Rawlik, K., Toussaint, M., and Vijayakumar, S. On stochastic optimal control and reinforcement
learning by approximate inference. Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2012.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M. I., and Moritz, P. Trust region policy optimization.
In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1889–1897, 2015.
Schulman, J., Abbeel, P., and Chen, X. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft Q-learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06440, 2017a.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017b.
Silver, D., Lever, G., Heess, N., Degris, T., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. Deterministic policy
gradient algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2014.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J.,
Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe, D., Nham, J., Kalchbrenner,
N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T., Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., and Hassabis, D. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, Jan 2016.
ISSN 0028-0836. Article.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT press
Cambridge, 1998.
Tan, J., Zhang, T., Coumans, E., Iscen, A., Bai, Y., Hafner, D., Bohez, S., and Vanhoucke, V. Sim-toreal: Learning agile locomotion for quadruped robots. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
2018.
Thomas, P. Bias in natural actor-critic algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 441–448, 2014.
Todorov, E. Linearly-solvable Markov decision problems. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 1369–1376. MIT Press, 2007.
14

Todorov, E. General duality between optimal control and estimation. In IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC), pp. 4286–4292. IEEE, 2008.
Toussaint, M. Robot trajectory optimization using approximate inference. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1049–1056. ACM, 2009.
Williams, R. J. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.
Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Rajeswaran, A., Levine, S., and Kumar, V. Dexterous manipulation with deep
reinforcement learning: Efficient, general, and low-cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.06045, 2018.
Ziebart, B. D. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal entropy.
Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
Ziebart, B. D., Maas, A. L., Bagnell, J. A., and Dey, A. K. Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement
learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1433–1438, 2008.

Appendix
A

Infinite Horizon Discounted Maximum Entropy Objective

The exact definition of the discounted maximum entropy objective is complicated by the fact that,
when using a discount factor for policy gradient methods, we typically do not discount the state
distribution, only the rewards. In that sense, discounted policy gradients typically do not optimize the
true discounted objective. Instead, they optimize average reward, with the discount serving to reduce
variance, as discussed by Thomas (2014). However, we can define the objective that is optimized
under a discount factor as
"∞
#
∞
X
X
l−t
J(π) =
E(st ,at )∼ρπ
γ Esl ∼p,al ∼π [r(st , at ) + αH(π( · |st ))|st , at ] .
(19)
t=0

l=t

This objective corresponds to maximizing the discounted expected reward and entropy for future
states originating from every state-action tuple (st , at ) weighted by its probability ρπ under the
current policy.

B

Proofs

B.1

Lemma 1

Lemma 1 (Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator T π in Equation 2
and a mapping Q0 : S × A → R with |A| < ∞, and define Qk+1 = T π Qk . Then the sequence Qk
will converge to the soft Q-value of π as k → ∞.
Proof. Define the entropy augmented reward as rπ (st , at ) , r(st , at ) + Est+1 ∼p [H (π( · |st+1 ))]
and rewrite the update rule as
Q(st , at ) ← rπ (st , at ) + γ Est+1 ∼p,at+1 ∼π [Q(st+1 , at+1 )]

(20)

and apply the standard convergence results for policy evaluation (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The
assumption |A| < ∞ is required to guarantee that the entropy augmented reward is bounded.
B.2

Lemma 2

Lemma 2 (Soft Policy Improvement). Let πold ∈ Π and let πnew be the optimizer of the minimization
problem defined in Equation 4. Then Qπnew (st , at ) ≥ Qπold (st , at ) for all (st , at ) ∈ S × A with
|A| < ∞.
15

Proof. Let πold ∈ Π and let Qπold and V πold be the corresponding soft state-action value and soft
state value, and let πnew be defined as
πnew ( · |st ) = arg min
DKL (π 0 ( · |st ) k exp (Qπold (st , · ) − log Z πold (st )))
0
π ∈Π

= arg min
Jπold (π 0 ( · |st )).
0

(21)

π ∈Π

It must be the case that Jπold (πnew ( · |st )) ≤ Jπold (πold ( · |st )), since we can always choose πnew =
πold ∈ Π. Hence
Eat ∼πnew [log πnew (at |st ) − Qπold (st , at ) + log Z πold (st )] ≤ Eat ∼πold [log πold (at |st ) − Qπold (st , at ) + log Z πold (st )],

(22)
and since partition function Z

πold

depends only on the state, the inequality reduces to

Eat ∼πnew [Qπold (st , at ) − log πnew (at |st )] ≥ V πold (st ).

(23)

Next, consider the soft Bellman equation:
Qπold (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + γ Est+1 ∼p [V πold (st+1 )]


≤ r(st , at ) + γ Est+1 ∼p Eat+1 ∼πnew [Qπold (st+1 , at+1 ) − log πnew (at+1 |st+1 )]
..
.
≤ Qπnew (st , at ),
(24)
where we have repeatedly expanded Qπold on the RHS by applying the soft Bellman equation and the
bound in Equation 23. Convergence to Qπnew follows from Lemma 1.
B.3

Theorem 1

Theorem 1 (Soft Policy Iteration). Repeated application of soft policy evaluation and soft policy
∗
improvement to any π ∈ Π converges to a policy π ∗ such that Qπ (st , at ) ≥ Qπ (st , at ) for all
π ∈ Π and (st , at ) ∈ S × A, assuming |A| < ∞.
Proof. Let πi be the policy at iteration i. By Lemma 2, the sequence Qπi is monotonically increasing.
Since Qπ is bounded above for π ∈ Π (both the reward and entropy are bounded), the sequence
converges to some π ∗ . We will still need to show that π ∗ is indeed optimal. At convergence, it
must be case that Jπ∗ (π ∗ ( · |st )) < Jπ∗ (π( · |st )) for all π ∈ Π, π 6= π ∗ . Using the same iterative
∗
argument as in the proof of Lemma 2, we get Qπ (st , at ) > Qπ (st , at ) for all (st , at ) ∈ S × A, that
is, the soft value of any other policy in Π is lower than that of the converged policy. Hence π ∗ is
optimal in Π.

C

Enforcing Action Bounds

We use an unbounded Gaussian as the action distribution. However, in practice, the actions needs
to be bounded to a finite interval. To that end, we apply an invertible squashing function (tanh) to
the Gaussian samples, and employ the change of variables formula to compute the likelihoods of the
bounded actions. In the other words, let u ∈ RD be a random variable and µ(u|s) the corresponding
density with infinite support. Then a = tanh(u), where tanh is applied elementwise, is a random
variable with support in (−1, 1) with a density given by
  −1
da
π(a|s) = µ(u|s) det
.
(25)
du
Since the Jacobian da/du = diag(1 − tanh2 (u)) is diagonal, the log-likelihood has a simple form
log π(a|s) = log µ(u|s) −

D
X
i=1

where ui is the ith element of u.
16


log 1 − tanh2 (ui ) ,

(26)

D

Hyperparameters

Table 1 lists the common SAC parameters used in the comparative evaluation in Figure 1.
Table 1: SAC Hyperparameters
Parameter

Value

optimizer
learning rate
discount (γ)
replay buffer size
number of hidden layers (all networks)
number of hidden units per layer
number of samples per minibatch
entropy target
nonlinearity
target smoothing coefficient (τ )
target update interval
gradient steps

Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
3 · 10−4
0.99
106
2
256
256
− dim (A) (e.g. , -6 for HalfCheetah-v1)
ReLU
0.005
1
1

17

